README.md, before:

# slack-merge-queue

handles a merge queue with github actions and slack.

## Setup

### Step 1: Create or adjust your slack web api bot

Create a slack api bot. If one exists for your organization then retrieve the Oauth token.

**Base required scopes:**

- [chat:write.customize](https://api.slack.com/scopes/chat:write.customize)
- [incoming-webhook](https://api.slack.com/scopes/incoming-webhook): should be enabled when the bot is added to a channel

**Methods used and their scopes:**

Please see each method's required scopes and add them to your slack bot token. If a new method is used with a new set of scopes, this will typically be a breaking change

Methods:

- [users.info](https://api.slack.com/methods/users.info)
- [conversations.members](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.members)
- [conversations.list](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.list)
- [conversations.history](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.history)
- [chat.postMessage](https://api.slack.com/methods/chat.postMessage)
- [chat.update](https://api.slack.com/methods/chat.update)

### Step 2: Install bot to channel.

Once the bot is setup, install the bot to your desired channel.

NB:

- For private channels, please additionally invite your bot user to the channel just as if you would invite any regular user.

### Step 3: Create github secret

create a github secret with name `SLACK_TOKEN` and its value the `Bot User OAuth Access Token`.

### Step 4: Add build configs

Add the actions to your workflow. ensure the modes are used correctly as explained in the `Modes` section.

## Modes

There are various modes to achieve the different actions to manage the queue. These are:

### INIT

This mode is responsible for adding a pull request to the slack queue. You can do this by commenting on a pull request with the `init_trigger` (default: `/merging`). For this mode to work, ensure this piece of your workflow is merged to the main branch of your repository.

sample:

```yaml
name: sample-add-to-q

on:
  issue_comment:
    types: [created, edited]

jobs:
  add_to_queue:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Add PR to queue
    steps:
      - name: Add PR to queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: add_to_q
        with:
          mode: 'INIT'
          init_trigger: '/merging'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
      # Use the output from the `add_to_q` step
      - name: Get the output
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.add_to_q.outputs.status }}"
```

Additionally, you can set slack users to be notified by using a `notify:` tag in the comment on a new line. This is a comma seperated list of user references. The user reference can be the users:

- slack user id
- slack user's full name
- slack display name
- slack username
- email username portion (eg. **john.doe**@smq.com)

Please note that these references are case sensitive

eg.

```
/merging
notify: U024BE7LH, Max Musterman, Mark, jim.j, john.doe
```

### MERGE

This mode updates the slack message of the current pull request.

**Actions taken:**

- It will change the `Queue Status` from `MERGING` to either `CANCELLED` or `MERGED` for current PR.
- It will send a message to alert the next Pull request in the queue when the current pull request is closed/merged.
- If a PR is merged ahead of one currently up for merge, The unmerged PR(s) will be marked as `STALE`

sample:

```yaml
name: sample_update_queue

on:
  pull_request:
    types: [closed]

jobs:
  update_q_on_close:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Update Queue
    steps:
      - name: Update queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: update_q_on_close
        with:
          mode: 'MERGE'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
          merge_ready_message: 'Last PR closed. This PR is now up for merge!'
      # Use the output from the `update_q_on_close` step
      - name: Get the output status
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.update_q_on_close.outputs.status }}"
      - name: Get the next PR number
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.update_q_on_close.outputs.next_pr }}"
```

### ALERT

This mode alerts the current pull request in the queue by adding a message to its thread. Typically this can be used to alert the thread when the build/workflow is complete but can be used at any point in the build process based on your use case. If used to alert when the build is complete, ensure the proper dependencies are set to ensure the job is run last or close to last as a post build step.

simple example:

- [pr-build-complete.yml](.github/workflows/pr-build-complete.yml)

workflow completed example:

- [pr-build-complete-wait.yml](.github/workflows/pr-build-complete-wait.yml)
- [dummy-build.yml](.github/workflows/dummy-build.yml)

```yaml
name: sample_alert_current

on:
  workflow_run:
    # will trigger alert for each workflow listed
    workflows: ['mock-workflow']
    types:
      - completed

jobs:
  alert_current_pr:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Alert Current in Queue
    steps:
      - name: Alert queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: alert
        with:
          mode: 'ALERT'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
          # the following variable is only available in 'workflow_run' event
          alert_message: ${{ github.event.workflow.name }}  is complete!
      # Use the output from the `alert` step
      - name: Get the output status
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.alert.outputs.status }}"
```

## Build Failure Policy

- Invalid required input will fail the build
- Process errors willnot fail the build
  - A status will be given along with an error log

## API Documentation

### Queue Tag

The queue tag is sent by the `INIT` mode.

Pattern: `[Search Prefix] :: [PR number] :: [Queue Status] :: [PR link]`

eg.

`Q-PR :: 3 :: MERGED :: chore: add package keyword`

| Section       | Description                                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Search Prefix | Critical piece used to search for queue tags within the channel. It is important that non-queue messages within the channel do not contain the sub string `Q-PR` |
| PR number     | The pull request number                                                                                                                                          |
| Queue Status  | The status of the pull request in the queue. <br/><br/> **enum**: `MERGING`, `CANCELLED`, `MERGED`, `STALE`                                                      |
| PR link       | A link to the pull request page. The text for the link is the pull request title                                                                                 |

### Action Inputs

| Input               | Modes  | Description                                                                                                                                                          |
| ------------------- | ------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| mode                | \_\_\_ | Required input to tell the GH Action what mode to run. An invalid mode will fail the build. <br/><br/> **enum**: `INIT`, `MERGE`, `ALERT` <br/> **required:** `true` |
| channel             | _ALL_  | The slack channel to use as the merge queue. Can specify channel id or name <br/> **required:** `true`                                                               |
| init_trigger        | INIT   | The trigger text for adding a PR to the merge queue. <br/> **default:** `/merging`                                                                                   |
| merge_ready_message | MERGE  | Message to be sent to the next PR in the queue after a merge/cancel occurs <br/> **default:** `Last PR closed. This PR is now up for merge!`                         |
| alert_message       | ALERT  | Message to be sent to the current PR in the queue <br/> **default:** `build is complete. Time to merge!`                                                             |

### Action Outputs

#### next_pr

this is the `PR number` for the next pull request in the queue. This is only exported by the `MERGE` mode.

#### status

The status of the build run to give an insight into what has happened. These can be useful for taking additional actions in a workflow

| Status            | Modes        | Description                                                                                  |
| ----------------- | ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ALREADY_CLOSED    | INIT         | exported when the trigger is used but the pull request is already in a closed state.         |
| TRIGGER_NOT_FOUND | INIT         | exported if a pull request comment does not contain the desired trigger                      |
| ALREADY_QUEUED    | INIT         | exported when a PR is already added to the slack queue                                       |
| ADDED_TO_QUEUE    | INIT         | exported when the pull request has been added to the slack queue                             |
| NOT_FOUND         | ALERT, MERGE | exported when a queue tag is not found in slack                                              |
| COMPLETED         | ALERT        | exported when an unspecific action is complete. one such action is the generic alert action. |
| CANCELLED         | MERGE        | exported when the build tag status has been updated to cancelled                             |
| MERGED            | MERGE        | exported when the build tag status has been updated to merged                                |
| FAILED            | _ALL_        | When any failure occurs then this status will be set for all modes                           |

## Samples

![thread](images/smq-thread.png)

## Notes

- pull requests are welcome!

## License

Apache 2.0

Commit message:

fix: ensure icon_emoji and icon_url can both be used

README.md, after:

# slack-merge-queue

handles a merge queue with github actions and slack.

## Setup

### Step 1: Create or adjust your slack web api bot

Create a slack api bot. If one exists for your organization then retrieve the Oauth token.

**Base required scopes:**

- [chat:write.customize](https://api.slack.com/scopes/chat:write.customize)
- [incoming-webhook](https://api.slack.com/scopes/incoming-webhook): should be enabled when the bot is added to a channel

**Methods used and their scopes:**

Please see each method's required scopes and add them to your slack bot token. If a new method is used with a new set of scopes, this will typically be a breaking change

Methods:

- [users.info](https://api.slack.com/methods/users.info)
- [conversations.members](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.members)
- [conversations.list](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.list)
- [conversations.history](https://api.slack.com/methods/conversations.history)
- [chat.postMessage](https://api.slack.com/methods/chat.postMessage)
- [chat.update](https://api.slack.com/methods/chat.update)

### Step 2: Install bot to channel.

Once the bot is setup, install the bot to your desired channel.

NB:

- For private channels, please additionally invite your bot user to the channel just as if you would invite any regular user.

### Step 3: Create github secret

create a github secret with name `SLACK_TOKEN` and its value the `Bot User OAuth Access Token`.

### Step 4: Add build configs

Add the actions to your workflow. ensure the modes are used correctly as explained in the `Modes` section.

## Modes

There are various modes to achieve the different actions to manage the queue. These are:

### INIT

This mode is responsible for adding a pull request to the slack queue. You can do this by commenting on a pull request with the `init_trigger` (default: `/merging`). For this mode to work, ensure this piece of your workflow is merged to the main branch of your repository.

sample:

```yaml
name: sample-add-to-q

on:
  issue_comment:
    types: [created, edited]

jobs:
  add_to_queue:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Add PR to queue
    steps:
      - name: Add PR to queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: add_to_q
        with:
          mode: 'INIT'
          init_trigger: '/merging'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
      # Use the output from the `add_to_q` step
      - name: Get the output
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.add_to_q.outputs.status }}"
```

Additionally, you can set slack users to be notified by using a `notify:` tag in the comment on a new line. This is a comma seperated list of user references. The user reference can be the users:

- slack user id
- slack user's full name
- slack display name
- slack username
- email username portion (eg. **john.doe**@smq.com)

Please note that these references are case sensitive

eg.

```
/merging
notify: U024BE7LH, Max Musterman, Mark, jim.j, john.doe
```

### MERGE

This mode updates the slack message of the current pull request.

**Actions taken:**

- It will change the `Queue Status` from `MERGING` to either `CANCELLED` or `MERGED` for current PR.
- It will send a message to alert the next Pull request in the queue when the current pull request is closed/merged.
- If a PR is merged ahead of one currently up for merge, The unmerged PR(s) will be marked as `STALE`. They can be added to the queue again by re-triggering the `INIT` mode.

sample:

```yaml
name: sample_update_queue

on:
  pull_request:
    types: [closed]

jobs:
  update_q_on_close:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Update Queue
    steps:
      - name: Update queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: update_q_on_close
        with:
          mode: 'MERGE'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
          merge_ready_message: 'Last PR closed. This PR is now up for merge!'
      # Use the output from the `update_q_on_close` step
      - name: Get the output status
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.update_q_on_close.outputs.status }}"
      - name: Get the next PR number
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.update_q_on_close.outputs.next_pr }}"
```

### ALERT

This mode alerts the current pull request in the queue by adding a message to its thread. Typically this can be used to alert the thread when the build/workflow is complete but can be used at any point in the build process based on your use case. If used to alert when the build is complete, ensure the proper dependencies are set to ensure the job is run last or close to last as a post build step.

simple example:

- [pr-build-complete.yml](.github/workflows/pr-build-complete.yml)

workflow completed example:

- [pr-build-complete-wait.yml](.github/workflows/pr-build-complete-wait.yml)
- [dummy-build.yml](.github/workflows/dummy-build.yml)

```yaml
name: sample_alert_current

on:
  workflow_run:
    # will trigger alert for each workflow listed
    workflows: ['mock-workflow']
    types:
      - completed

jobs:
  alert_current_pr:
    env:
      SLACK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SLACK_TOKEN }}
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Alert Current in Queue
    steps:
      - name: Alert queue
        uses: lwhiteley/slack-merge-queue@{version}
        id: alert
        with:
          mode: 'ALERT'
          channel: 'merge-queue'
          # the following variable is only available in 'workflow_run' event
          alert_message: ${{ github.event.workflow.name }}  is complete!
      # Use the output from the `alert` step
      - name: Get the output status
        run: echo "status => ${{ steps.alert.outputs.status }}"
```

## Build Failure Policy

- Invalid required input will fail the build
- Process errors willnot fail the build
  - A status will be given along with an error log

## API Documentation

### Queue Tag

The queue tag is sent by the `INIT` mode.

Pattern: `[Search Prefix] :: [PR number] :: [Queue Status] :: [PR link]`

eg.

`Q-PR :: 3 :: MERGED :: chore: add package keyword`

| Section       | Description                                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Search Prefix | Critical piece used to search for queue tags within the channel. It is important that non-queue messages within the channel do not contain the sub string `Q-PR` |
| PR number     | The pull request number                                                                                                                                          |
| Queue Status  | The status of the pull request in the queue. <br/><br/> **enum**: `MERGING`, `CANCELLED`, `MERGED`, `STALE`                                                      |
| PR link       | A link to the pull request page. The text for the link is the pull request title                                                                                 |

### Action Inputs

| Input               | Modes  | Description                                                                                                                                                          |
| ------------------- | ------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| mode                | \_\_\_ | Required input to tell the GH Action what mode to run. An invalid mode will fail the build. <br/><br/> **enum**: `INIT`, `MERGE`, `ALERT` <br/> **required:** `true` |
| channel             | _ALL_  | The slack channel to use as the merge queue. Can specify channel id or name <br/> **required:** `true`                                                               |
| icon_emoji          | _ALL_  | A slack emoji to use as the bot's avatar <br/> **default:** `:robot_face:`                                                                                           |
| icon_url            | _ALL_  | An image url to use as the bot's avatar. Overrides `icon_emoji`. <br/> **default:** `undefined`                                                                      |
| init_trigger        | INIT   | The trigger text for adding a PR to the merge queue. <br/> **default:** `/merging`                                                                                   |
| merge_ready_message | MERGE  | Message to be sent to the next PR in the queue after a merge/cancel occurs <br/> **default:** `Last PR closed. This PR is now up for merge!`                         |
| alert_message       | ALERT  | Message to be sent to the current PR in the queue <br/> **default:** `build is complete. Time to merge!`                                                             |  |
| only_when_current   | ALERT  | When `true`, will only sent an alert to a PR in slack if it is currently up for merge. <br/> **default:** `true`                                                     |

### Action Outputs

#### next_pr

this is the `PR number` for the next pull request in the queue. This is only exported by the `MERGE` mode.

#### status

The status of the build run to give an insight into what has happened. These can be useful for taking additional actions in a workflow

| Status            | Modes        | Description                                                                                  |
| ----------------- | ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ALREADY_CLOSED    | INIT         | exported when the trigger is used but the pull request is already in a closed state.         |
| TRIGGER_NOT_FOUND | INIT         | exported if a pull request comment does not contain the desired trigger                      |
| ALREADY_QUEUED    | INIT         | exported when a PR is already added to the slack queue                                       |
| ADDED_TO_QUEUE    | INIT         | exported when the pull request has been added to the slack queue                             |
| NOT_FOUND         | ALERT, MERGE | exported when a queue tag is not found in slack                                              |
| COMPLETED         | ALERT        | exported when an unspecific action is complete. one such action is the generic alert action. |
| CANCELLED         | MERGE        | exported when the build tag status has been updated to cancelled                             |
| MERGED            | MERGE        | exported when the build tag status has been updated to merged                                |
| FAILED            | _ALL_        | When any failure occurs then this status will be set for all modes                           |

## Samples

![thread](images/smq-thread.png)

## Notes

- pull requests are welcome!

## License

Apache 2.0
